# JAG1-Membrane-Expression-Assay
## Functional characterization of 2,832 JAG1 variants supports reclassification for Alagille syndrome and improves guidance for clinical variant interpretation

Authors: Melissa A. Gilbert

*Abstract:* Pathogenic variants in the *JAG1* gene are a primary cause of the multi-system disorder Alagille syndrome. Although variant detection rates are high for this disease, there is uncertainty associated with the classification of missense variants that leads to reduced diagnostic yield. Consequently, up to 85% of reported JAG1 missense variants have uncertain or conflicting classifications. We generated a library of 2,832 JAG1 nucleotide variants within exons 1-7, a region with a high number of reported missense variants, and designed a high-throughput assay to measure JAG1 membrane expression, a requirement for normal function. After calibration using a set of 175 known or predicted pathogenic and benign variants included within the variant library, 486 variants were characterized as functionally abnormal (n=277 abnormal and n=209 likely abnormal), of which 439 (90.3%) were missense. We identified divergent membrane expression occurring at specific residues, indicating that loss of the WT residue itself does not drive pathogenicity, a finding supported by structural modeling data and with broad implications for clinical variant classification both for Alagille syndrome and globally across other disease genes. Of 144 uncertain variants reported in patients undergoing clinical or research testing, 27 had functionally abnormal membrane expression and inclusion of our data resulted in the reclassification of 26 to likely pathogenic. Functional evidence augments the classification of genomic variants, reducing uncertainty and improving diagnostics. Inclusion of this repository of functional evidence during JAG1 variant reclassification will significantly affect resolution of variant pathogenicity, making a critical impact on the molecular diagnosis of Alagille syndrome.